Add Priority and Group Send Order to SUBSCRIBE, clarify Publisher Priority (#470)
moq-wg/moq-transport: draft-ietf-moq-transport.md

* {{session}} covers aspects of setting up a MOQT session.

> * {{priority}} covers mechanisms for prioritizing subscriptions.

Author: ```suggestion
* {{priorities}} covers mechanisms for prioritizing subscriptions.
```

> * {{priorities}} covers mechanisms for prioritizing subscriptions.

Reviewer: s/prioritizing subscriptions/prioritizing subscriptions and publications.

'GOAWAY Timeout' if the client doesn't close the session quickly enough.

# Priorities {#priorities}

MoQ priorities allow a subscriber and original publisher to influence
the transmission order of Objects within a session in the presence of
congestion.

The subscriber indicates the priority of a subscription via the
Subscriber Priority field and the original publisher indicates priority
in every stream header.  As such, the subscriber's priority is a property
of the subscription and the original publisher's priority is a property
of the Track and the Objects it contains. In both cases, a lower value

> indicates a higher priority, with 0 being the highest priority.

Reviewer 2: Should this also specify lowest priority and default?

Author: In the current PR, there is no default, but I can add the lowest priority.

The Subscriber Priority is considered first when selecting
a subscription to send data on within a given session.  The original
subscriber priority can change within the track, so subscription is
prioritized based on the highest priority data currently available to send.
For example, if the subscription had some data at priority 6 and other data
at priority 10, then the subscription priority would be 6.  When both
the subscriber and original publisher priorities for a subscription are
equal, send order is implmentation-depdendent, but the expectation
is that all subscriptions will be able to send at least some data.

The subscriber's priority can be changed via a SUBSCRIBE_UPDATE message.

> The publisher SHOULD respect the subscriber and original publisher's

Reviewer 2: Maybe call out relays specifically? This does not make sense for original publishers.

Author: I can change it, though if one was using MoQ in a P2P application, wouldn't the subscriber's priority matter and the publlsher would be the original publisher?

priorities.

In addition, SUBSCRIBE specifies a Delivery Order of either
'Ascending' or 'Descending', which indicates whether the lowest or
highest Group Id SHOULD be delivered first when multiple Groups are
available to send.

Within the same group, and the same priority level,
objects with a lower Object Id are always sent before objects with a
higher Object Id, regardless of the specified Delivery Order.

Relays SHOULD NOT directly use Subscriber Priority or Delivery Order
from incoming subscriptions for upstream subscriptions. Relays use of
Subscriber Priority for upstream subscriptions is based on

> a number of factors specific to it, such as the populatity of the

Author: ```suggestion
a number of factors specific to it, such as the popularity of the
```

> content or policy.

Reviewer 2: How about "SHOULD specify blank priority by default, MAY prioritize based on popularity/etc"?

Author: In this PR, there isn't any default, but I also don't think blank is inherently right.

'GOAWAY Timeout' if the client doesn't close the session quickly enough.

# Priorities {#priorities}

MoQ priorities allow a subscriber and original publisher to influence
the transmission order of Objects within a session in the presence of
congestion.

Given the critical nature of control messages and their relatively
small size, the control stream SHOULD be prioritized higher than all
subscribed Objects.

The subscriber indicates the priority of a subscription via the
Subscriber Priority field and the original publisher indicates priority

> in every stream header.  As such, the subscriber's priority is a property

Reviewer 3: stream or datagram header

Reviewer 4: Agree with Alan

Author: Good point, done

of the subscription and the original publisher's priority is a property
of the Track and the Objects it contains. In both cases, a lower value
indicates a higher priority, with 0 being the highest priority.

The Subscriber Priority is considered first when selecting

> a subscription to send data on within a given session. The original

Reviewer 3: > When two or more tracks have equal subscriber priority, the original publisher priority is considered next

publisher priority is considered next and can change within the track,
so subscriptions are prioritized based on the highest priority data
available to send. For example, if the subscription had data at
priority 6 and priority 10 to send, the subscription priority would be 6.
When both the subscriber and original publisher priorities for a

> subscription are equal, send order is implementation-dependent, but the

Reviewer 3: It's not that `sub-pri == orig-pub-pri`, it's when `sub1.pri == sub2.pri` and `pub1.pri == pub2.pri`

> When the subscriber and original publisher priorities for two or more tracks are both equal

Reviewer 4: given we use "send order" to talk about Ascending / Descending, I got confused when I read this. I think it could be less confusing to replace "send order" with "track selected to send next object" or something like that.

expectation is that all subscriptions will be able to send some data.

The subscriber's priority can be changed via a SUBSCRIBE_UPDATE message.

In addition, SUBSCRIBE or SUBSCRIBE_OK specifies a Group Order of
either 'Ascending' or 'Descending', which indicates whether the lowest or
highest Group Id SHOULD be sent first when multiple Groups are

> available to send.

Reviewer 4: This seems slightly under specified. If a last mile relay received two different values in both SUBSCRIBE and SUBSCRIBE_OK, we need to say which one takes priority.  We agreed on the end subscriber would take priority so this should have a bit more text to say value in SUBSCRIBE overrides in value in SUBSCRIBE_OK.

Author: Good point, I rewrote this paragraph to better match the current framing.

Within the same group, and the same priority level,
objects with a lower Object Id are always sent before objects with a

> higher Object Id, regardless of the specified Group Order.

Reviewer 3: I think we should revisit this for stream-per-object and datagram.  Forcing these to be in object ID order seems like a restriction of functionality that is not strictly required.

Reviewer: s/the same priority level/ the same object priority level

> higher Object Id, regardless of the specified Group Order.

Reviewer 4: This seems correct as written and covers the case where the publisher priority is the same but we need to also cover the case where where publisher priorities are not the same in which  case publisher priority determines which is sent first. This may just be implied here but better to say.

Author: True, I added a bit more text to clarify what happens when priority varies within a group.

Relays SHOULD respect the subscriber and original publisher's priorities.
Relays SHOULD NOT directly use Subscriber Priority or Group Order
from incoming subscriptions for upstream subscriptions. Relays use of

> Subscriber Priority for upstream subscriptions is based on

Reviewer 3: s/Subscriber Priority/priority fields/ ?

Reviewer 4: I like original text better because priority fields seems a bit undefined to me.

a number of factors specific to it, such as the popularity of the
content or policy.

MoQ Sessions can span multiple namespaces, and priorities are treated
equally, regardless of the namespace.  The subscriber's priority is
considered first, so there is no incentive for the original publisher
to attempt to prioritize all of its Tracks higher than another

> namespace.  Additionally, it is anticipated that when multiple namespaces

Reviewer 5: We may have a problem here. If we expect aggregating relays to not forward subscriber priority preferences, then, in fact, all middle hops are likely to fall to publisher priority and may incentivize priority inflation. On the other hand, relays are going to do what they're going to do, and, it's possible that publisher priorities may be ignored for middle hops in practice.

Reviewer: We don't want to end up in the case where the susbcriber gets different experience on each new subscriber joining with different priority  than what has sent upstream. I feel keeping subscriber priorities not go beyond is a good design principle

Reviewer 4: I get what you are saying here but relays have to deal with a reasonable solution to this just to even be able to run lots of different applications on the same relay network even when application never have more than one namespace. I think there are two keys parts of this 1) we are not trying to specify how a relay network moves data around inside the relays and 2) relays will do what relays do. 

So thought relays could have if they don't think about this problem, I don't think we can say much more that this.

are present within a session, the namespaces could be coordinating,
possibly part of the same application.  In cases when pooling among
namespaces is expected to cause issues, multiple MoQ sessions, either
within a single connection or on multiple connections can be used.

> ## Priority Algorithm

Reviewer 3: This section left intentionally blank?

Reviewer: +1 on filling this with the psuedo-code ..

Author: Removed for now

'GOAWAY Timeout' if the client doesn't close the session quickly enough.

# Priorities {#priorities}

MoQ priorities allow a subscriber and original publisher to influence
the transmission order of Objects within a session in the presence of
congestion.

Given the critical nature of control messages and their relatively
small size, the control stream SHOULD be prioritized higher than all
subscribed Objects.

The subscriber indicates the priority of a subscription via the
Subscriber Priority field and the original publisher indicates priority
in every stream header.  As such, the subscriber's priority is a property
of the subscription and the original publisher's priority is a property
of the Track and the Objects it contains. In both cases, a lower value
indicates a higher priority, with 0 being the highest priority.

The Subscriber Priority is considered first when selecting

> a subscription to send data on within a given session. The original

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
a subscription to send data on within a given session. When two subscriptions have the same priority, the original
```

publisher priority is considered next and can change within the track,

> so subscriptions are prioritized based on the highest priority data

Reviewer 6: I think it's less confusing if you say publisher priority is per stream, instead of per track.

Reviewer 3: You will need to update this bit, since we agreed it's latest, not highest.

Reviewer: I feel this is right as it is worded ..

Reviewer 4: We agreed on highest at this point, the latest is for other part. So I think this is correct as written here. Just to reason about this this, think about a track being send stream per object where publisher priorities changed. I don't think publisher priority is per stream - to start with it is for datagrams too.

available to send. For example, if the subscription had data at
priority 6 and priority 10 to send, the subscription priority would be 6.
When both the subscriber and original publisher priorities for a
subscription are equal, send order is implementation-dependent, but the
expectation is that all subscriptions will be able to send some data.

> The subscriber's priority can be changed via a SUBSCRIBE_UPDATE message.

Reviewer 6: Is this retroactive?

Reviewer 4: I imagine lots of implementations would  not apply the new priority to data that had already been send or queued to the outgoing QUIC stream and certainly not to UDP datagrams already sent to the OS kernel.  So I think this is a quality of implementation and implementation choice.

The publisher SHOULD respect the subscriber and original publisher's
priorities.

In addition, SUBSCRIBE specifies a Delivery Order of either
'Ascending' or 'Descending', which indicates whether the lowest or

> highest Group Id SHOULD be delivered first when multiple Groups are

Reviewer 6: This is only true when groups have the same priority, since we're allowing the publisher priority to change per stream.

available to send.

Within the same group, and the same priority level,
objects with a lower Object Id are always sent before objects with a

> higher Object Id, regardless of the specified Delivery Order.

Reviewer 6: A good reason to call it `Group Order` instead of `Delivery Order`; it doesn't apply to object ordering.

> Relays SHOULD NOT directly use Subscriber Priority or Delivery Order

Reviewer 6: As briefly discussed at the interim, we also need the `Publisher Group Order` in SUBSCRIBE_OK and TRACK_STATUS. Relays should use that instead of the `Subscriber's Group Order`.

from incoming subscriptions for upstream subscriptions. Relays use of
Subscriber Priority for upstream subscriptions is based on
a number of factors specific to it, such as the popularity of the

> content or policy.

Reviewer: I wonder if we should add the note  on publisher preference here too

Reviewer 3: @suhasHere : what's your suggestion?  Something like:

`In the absence of other specific reasons, relays SHOULD give all upstream subscriptions equal priority`

Author: I expanded the sentence a bit more to note that a relay can use a single Subscriber Priority value for all upstream subscriptions.

MoQ Sessions can span multiple namespaces, and priorities are treated
equally, regardless of the namespace.  The subscriber's priority is

> considered first, so there is no incentive for the original publisher

Reviewer 6: A subscriber will often want to use the default publisher priority, so this isn't always true.

Author: Fair point, I changed this to text that points out the subscriber priority provides a mechanism to override.

to attempt to prioritize all of its Tracks higher than another
namespace.  Additionally, it is anticipated that when multiple namespaces
are present within a session, the namespaces could be coordinating,
possibly part of the same application.  In cases when pooling among
namespaces is expected to cause issues, multiple MoQ sessions, either

> within a single connection or on multiple connections can be used.

Reviewer 6: I don't think this will work in practice. There's too many use-cases where publishers are not coordinated because they're using different software or versions. 

ex. I want to show multiple Twitch streams on the same page. There's just no way that I can have OBS and ffmpeg agree to publish with the same priority scheme. It doesn't have to be malicious; one of the publishers is undoubtedly going to monopolize the connection.

Dialing a new connection is expensive and removes the ability to use subscriber priorities. I would totally agree with using multiple QUIC sessions if it had such a layer, but the alternative is WebTransport pooling...

And yes, you could use subscriber priorities only to avoid this issue, but that's a big limitation that could be easily solved by sandboxing namespaces. Relays can't use the subscriber's priority anyway and will have to sandbox namespaces if using MoQ over the backbone.

Reviewer 3: I'd rather say that a relay shouldn't compare publisher priorities from uncoordinated publishers, but comparing them from coordinate publishers is fine.  Within a namespace, we can assert all tracks have coordinated priority, but between two namespaces, it would presently have to be implementation dependent.  That said, it shouldn't be hard to fix - break off part of namespace into another tuple field (application or something).

Reviewer 4: Alan, I don't think that would help, that just moves the same problem to the next layer and it would be turtles all the way down. The basic issue is when a content delivery network delivers content for lots of different applications/customers, it needs to decide how it will be "fair" between the application/customers and that is way more complicated that just use whatever the priority header asked for.

Reviewer: I agree with Ian. it is tough to be prescriptive and the proposed text pretty much is well defined

Reviewer 3: I am ok with merging the new language.  Long term, I don't plan to compare uncoordinated publisher priorities in my generic relay, and may make a proposal for how to avoid doing so.

congestion.

Given the critical nature of control messages and their relatively
small size, the control stream SHOULD be prioritized higher than all
subscribed Objects.

The subscriber indicates the priority of a subscription via the
Subscriber Priority field and the original publisher indicates priority
in every stream or datagram header.  As such, the subscriber's priority is a
property of the subscription and the original publisher's priority is a
property of the Track and the Objects it contains. In both cases, a lower
value indicates a higher priority, with 0 being the highest priority.

The Subscriber Priority is considered first when selecting
a subscription to send data on within a given session. When two or more tracks
have equal subscriber priority, the original publisher priority is considered
next and can change within the track, so subscriptions are prioritized based
on the highest priority data available to send. For example, if the subscription
had data at priority 6 and priority 10 to send, the subscription priority would
be 6. When both the subscriber and original publisher priorities for a
subscription are equal, send order is implementation-dependent, but the

> expectation is that all subscriptions will be able to send some data.

Reviewer: s/  send order is / the track whose object is being selected is /

Author: Good point, this text was a bit unclear.  I rewrote it to hopefully be more clear.

The subscriber's priority can be changed via a SUBSCRIBE_UPDATE message.
This updates the priority of all unsent data within the subscription,
though the details of the reprioitization are implementation-specific.

Subscriptions have a Group Order of either 'Ascending' or 'Descending',
which indicates whether the lowest or highest Group Id SHOULD be sent first
when multiple Groups are available to send.  A subscriber can specify either
'Ascending' or 'Descending' in the SUBSCRIBE message or they can specify they
want to use the Original Publisher's Group Order, which is indicated in
the corresponding SUBSCRIBE_OK.

> Within the same Group, and the same priority level,

Reviewer 2: I'm confused, does this imply that a single group can have multiple priorities within it?

Author: With Stream-per-Object, each Object can have a different priority in the current wire format.

'GOAWAY Timeout' if the client doesn't close the session quickly enough.

# Priorities {#priorities}

MoQ priorities allow a subscriber and original publisher to influence
the transmission order of Objects within a session in the presence of
congestion.

The subscriber can indicate the priority of a subscription via the
SUBSCRIBER_PRIORITY param and the original publisher indicates priority
in every stream header.

The publisher SHOULD respect the subscriber and publisher's priorities.

In addition, the SUBSCRIBE specifies a Delivery Order of either
'Ascending' or 'Descending', which indicates whether the lowest or
highest Group Id SHOULD be delivered first when multiple Groups are
available to send.

Within the same group, and the same priority level,
objects with a lower Object Id are always sent before objects with a
higher Object Id, regardless of the specified delivery_order.

> Relays SHOULD NOT directly use SUBSCRIBER_PRIORITY or Delivery Order 

Author: ```suggestion
Relays SHOULD NOT directly use SUBSCRIBER_PRIORITY or Delivery Order
```

'GOAWAY Timeout' if the client doesn't close the session quickly enough.

# Priorities {#priorities}

MoQ priorities allow a subscriber and original publisher to influence
the transmission order of Objects within a session in the presence of
congestion.

The subscriber can indicate the priority of a subscription via the
SUBSCRIBER_PRIORITY param and the original publisher indicates priority
in every stream header.  As such, the subscriber's priority is a property
of the subscription and the original publisher's priority is a property
of the Track and the Objects it contains. In both cases, a lower value
indicates a higher priority, with 0 being the highest priority.

The publisher SHOULD respect the subscriber and original publisher's
priorities.

> In addition, the SUBSCRIBE specifies a Delivery Order of either

Author: ```suggestion
In addition, SUBSCRIBE specifies a Delivery Order of either
```

(CDNs). Additionally, relays serve as policy enforcement points by
validating subscribe and publish requests at the edge of a network.

> Relays are not required to cache Objects, but relays need to have

Reviewer 6: A proxy is a relay too.

Reviewer 3: Why can't a relay be a 1:1 relay?  I'd just chop the sentence at

> Relays are not required to cache Objects

The recently merged terminology says 

> Relay: An entitly that is both a Publisher and a Subscriber, but not the Original Publisher or End Subscriber.

Reviewer 5: This gets a bit off topic, but I think the more important property of a relay is that it republishes tracks from an upstream publisher without modification. I think there may be another entity we could define which could consume one or more tracks from upstream publishers and act as the original publisher for some new tracks (e.g. in the case of "manifest manipulation" use cases at the edge), but I think that's something we should discuss separately.

Reviewer 5: As for this bit of text, I'm fine with it either way. To me, it makes explicit that relays may optionally be relatively stateless fan out nodes without any significant local caches, so long as they still allow downstream subscribers to subscribe to tracks from an upstream publisher.

Author: Based on the definition, I'll shorten this sentence and clarify some other text.

cases where the authorization is required at the track level. The value is an
ASCII string.

#### SUBSCRIBER_PRIORITY Parameter

The SUBSCRIBER_PRIORITY parameter (key 0x03) allows a subscriber to specify the
priority of a subscription relative to other subscriptions in the same session.
Lower numbers get higher priority and values range from 0 to 255 inclusive.

> More details on priorities are documented in {{}}

Author: ```suggestion
More details on priorities are documented in {{priorities}}
```

  Track Alias (i),
  Track Namespace (b),
  Track Name (b),

>   Subscriber Priority (8),

Reviewer: I think we need to make it optional or have a default of no-preference to follow original priority ?

>   Delivery Order (8),

Reviewer 2: Would it make more sense to make those parameters? Since both of those have a reasonable default value.

Author: They do, but making people explicitly specify them is also ok.

* Track Name: Identifies the track name as defined in ({{track-name}}).

* Subscriber Priority: Specifies the priority of a subscription relative to
other subscriptions in the same session. Lower numbers get higher priority.
See {{priorities}}.

* Delivery Order: Requests Objects for the subscription be delievered in

> Ascending (0x0) or Descending (0x1) order. See {{priorities}}.

Author: ```suggestion
Ascending (0x0) or Descending (0x1) order by group. See {{priorities}}.
```

> Values larger than 0x1 are a protocol error.

Reviewer: Ascending or Descending order of the group.

Author: Good point, done.

* Track Name: Identifies the track name as defined in ({{track-name}}).

* Subscriber Priority: Specifies the priority of a subscription relative to
other subscriptions in the same session. Lower numbers get higher priority.
See {{priorities}}.

> * Delivery Order: Requests Objects for the subscription be delievered in
> Ascending (0x0) or Descending (0x1) order by group. See {{priorities}}.
> Values larger than 0x1 are a protocol error.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* Group Send Order: Requests that objects be picked from Groups in the
subscription in Ascending (0x0) or Descending (0x1) order. See {{priorities}}.
Values larger than 0x1 are a protocol error.
```

  StartObject (i),
  EndGroup (i),
  EndObject (i),

>   Subscriber Priority (8),

Reviewer: I think we should make this optional or make a special value for "no preference, follow publisher prioirty"

Reviewer 2: My understanding of the mechanism at which we arrived at the interim is that if the subscriber does not care, it can set all priorities to the same value (e.g. `0x80`), and in that case, the publisher priorities take action.  The advantage of this approach is that if, for some reason, the subscriber decides later that it wants one track higher, it can set it to something like `0x70`, without having to reason about what priorities publisher assigned to its tracks.  It's also really easy to implement (`Final Priority = Subscriber Priority * 256 + Publisher Priority`).

Reviewer: I am fine with it,  but I am not sure how to communicate not to set value of 0x1 implying the most important after the control stream for all the tracks, whereas the subscriber's intent was " i don't care, please follow publisher's priority" .
One way to make it is encode this field as optional and when missing follow publisher's priority for the track.

Reviewer 3: Individual Comment:

> most important after the control stream for all the tracks

Should we just add explicit text that control stream always has priority over non-control? 

In that case, any value indicates "don't care, default to publisher" so long as the client sends the *same* value for all subscribes.

Author: Sure, I can add text about the control stream.

Reviewer: yes .. control stream should go with the most important priority and clarifying that will be good.

Author: I added a normative statement, PTAL

Reviewer: It would be good to say, if all the subscriber priorities are equal , publisher priorirty is followed for the objects correspnding to the subscribed tracks ?

Reviewer 3: Line 553-555 is *close* to what your are asking but could be clarified.

Current:

> The Subscriber Priority is considered first when selecting
a subscription to send data on within a given session. The original
publisher priority is considered next...

Maybe:

> The Subscriber Priority is considered first when selecting
a subscription to send data on within a given session. When two or more subscriptions have equal Subscriber Priority, the original
publisher priority is considered next...

  StartObject (i),
  EndGroup (i),
  EndObject (i),
  Subscriber Priority (8),

>   Group Order (8),

Reviewer: I don't think we need this in Subscribe_Update.

  StartObject (i),
  EndGroup (i),
  EndObject (i),

>   Subscriber Priority (8),

Reviewer 6: What about changing the group order too? It would be useful for toggling between reliable and unreliable playback.

Reviewer 3: +1 add Group Order to Subscribe Update

Author: I worry that could create a number of edge cases.  A large benefit of SUBSCRIBE_UPDATE vs UNSUBSCRIBE/SUBSCRIBE is it avoids missing Objects or double-sending Objects.

But I'm not writing the code, so if you think it's useful and won't add unnecessary complexity, I'll add it.

Reviewer 3: Omitting this from subscribe update in favor of unsub/sub is ok, but you might want to add a note that it's intentional.

Reviewer: +1 to @ianswett

Reviewer 4: Luke, I thought you were complaining about too many options :-)  I don't see the use case with this but at first glance does not seem like it would complicated the implementation too much so I am fine with it getting added.

Reviewer 3: The new text looks good.

* EndObject: The end Object ID, plus 1. A value of 0 means the entire group is
requested.

* Subscriber Priority: Specifies the priority of a subscription relative to
other subscriptions in the same session. Lower numbers get higher priority.
See {{priorities}}.

* Group Order: Allows the subscriber to request Objects be delivered in
Ascending (0x1) or Descending (0x2) order by group. See {{priorities}}.
A value of 0x0 indicates the original publisher's Group Order SHOULD be

> used. Values larger than 0x2 are a protocol error.

Reviewer: Line 580 indicates that group order cannot be changed via Subscribe update and I agree with that. We need to remove Group Order from the Update message though

Author: Thanks for catching that, removed.

IDs starts at 0, increasing sequentially for each object within the
group.

> * Priority: An 8 bit integer indicating the publisher's priority for the Object

Reviewer 2: This field should probably be called "Publisher Priority".

Author: Done.
